[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Eastern wisdom and modern
life with Alan W Watts,
produced by KQED San Francisco
for the Educational Television
and Radio Center.
Alan Watts is a
scholar, lecturer,
and the author of
many widely read books
on comparative
philosophy and religion.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>I suppose most
of you are familiar
with this old optical illusion.
And you're asked
the question, which
of the three thick black
lines is the longer?
And I suppose one's
natural reaction
is to say, the one on the left.
And I think you
know that this is
a result of the
illusion of perspective,
an illusion to
which we are so used
and by which we are
so easily fooled,
once we've accustomed
ourselves to it.
You might-- if that picture
were drawn more vividly-- even
be predisposed to thinking that
was a real passage stretching
away from you with
doors at the end.
And of course, if you came
up against that kind of thing
painted against
the wall, you might
make the mistake of walking
into it and banging your nose.
But this is an example of what
we were talking about last time
as "maya," that word
from Indian philosophy
which generally has the
meaning of "illusion,"
or rather, illusions brought
about by the acceptance
of certain conventions, of which
perspective was an example.
And when we are not aware
that certain things which
we take for granted-- like
the separateness of things
from each other-- is a
matter of convention,
we are apt to be fooled.
Now, I think one of the
conventions by which we
tend to be fooled more than
almost any other is time.
And for all human
beings, time as a matter
of extraordinary importance.
And perhaps, this is one
of the principal ways
in which we differ from animals.
Because man has been called
a time-binding animal.
That is to say, a creature who
is vividly aware of the fact
that his life moves, as it were,
along a line from the past,
through the present,
and into the future.
Animals, apparently, live
pretty much moment-by-moment.
They don't appear to have
very strong memories.
But because man has
a strong memory,
he is able to bear
the past in mind
and, as it were, cast it forward
into visions of the future,
based upon what has
happened in the past.
And therefore, although
this facility gives man
the most extraordinary
ability to plan his life,
to prepare for
future eventualities,
at the same time, there
is a very heavy price
which he pays for it.
And especially, if he takes
this ability too seriously.
In other words, if he
doesn't realize that
the true reality
in which he lives
is the present moment-- now.
For example, the
animal probably doesn't
concern itself very
much with problems
of future disease,
death, or starvation,
and things of that kind.
If an animal sees another
dead animal lying around,
I don't suppose he
thinks to himself, well,
one day that's going
to happen to me.
Rather, he just
sees a dead animal,
sniffs it, sees whether it's
good to eat, and wanders away.
But for human beings,
it's entirely different.
Because we actually
spend most of our time
and a great deal of our
emotional energy living
in time which is not here,
living in an elsewhere which
is not concretely real.
So much so that, although we may
be quite comfortable and happy
in our present circumstances,
if there is not
a guarantee, not a promise of
a good time coming tomorrow
and tomorrow and tomorrow and
tomorrow, we are, at once,
unhappy, even in the midst
of pleasure and affluence.
And so, we develop a kind of
chronic anxiety about time.
We want to be sure,
more and more,
because of our sensitivity
to the feeling of time,
that our future is assured.
And for this reason,
the future becomes
of more importance to most
human beings than the present.
And in this sense, we are
hooked, taken in by a maya.
Because it is of
very little use to us
to be able to control
and plan the future
unless we are capable, at the
same kind, of living totally
in the present.
And so, when, in
civilized societies,
we spend so much of our
time living for the future,
we become very much like
those celebrated donkeys
that have a carrot fastened on
a stick that's tied to the neck,
behind here.
And it comes over.
And there's the carrot
dangling in front of them.
And they pursue it, pursue
it, pursue it, but could never
reach it.
And so, in exactly the same
way, it's that way with us.
My goodness, don't you remember
when you went first to school?
And you went to kindergarten.
And in kindergarten,
the idea was
to push along so that you
could get into first grade.
And then, push along
so that you could
get into second grade,
third grade, and so on,
going up and up.
And then, you went
to high school.
And this was a great
transition in life.
And now, the pressure
is being put on.
You must get ahead.
You must go up the
grades and, finally,
be good enough to
get to college.
And then, when you
get to college,
you're still going step-by-step
up to the great moment
in which you're ready to
go out into the world.
And then, when you get out
into this famous world,
there comes the
struggle for success
in profession or business.
And again, there seems to
be a ladder before you,
something for which you're
reaching all the time.
And then, suddenly, when you're
about 40 or 45 years old,
in the middle of life, you
wake up one day and say, huh?
I've arrived.
And by Jove, I feel pretty much
the same as I've always felt.
In fact, I'm not so
sure that I don't
feel a little bit cheated.
Because, you see,
you were fooled.
You were always living for
somewhere where you aren't.
And while, as I said, it
is of tremendous use for us
to be able to look ahead
in this way and to plan,
there is no use planning
for a future which,
when you get to it and
it becomes the present,
you won't be there.
You'll be living in some
other future, which hasn't yet
arrived.
And so, in this way, one
is never able, actually,
to inherit and enjoy the
fruits of one's action.
You can't live at all unless
you can live fully now.
And because now is
never satisfactory,
because we're never
really living in it,
we get more and more avid to
go ahead and pursue the future.
We develop our technology
to a fantastic ability
where we can, more and
more, fulfill our desires
for the future
almost immediately,
working towards a sort
of push-button world.
But have you ever stopped to
think what the world would
be like if you could fulfill
every wish the moment
you wished it?
Suppose, for example, on
going to bed at night,
you could always dream
whatever you wanted to dream.
What would happen after a while?
Of course, I suppose
at first, you
would dream fantastic
pleasures, wonderful adventures,
fulfillment of all the
things you ever wished.
Then, as time went
on, don't you think
you'd want to be a
little bit surprised?
To have a little bit
less control over what
was happening to you?
And after you'd experimented
with this for some months
or years, you might even want
dreams in which you suffered.
Because there is
no real delight,
no real fulfillment,
without delay.
Doesn't every child know, on
a hot day, when you think,
I'm terribly
thirsty, and I'd like
an ice-cream soda-- haven't you
tried the experiment of putting
of drinking it?
Putting off, so that you
get thirstier and thirstier?
And it's so much fun when
you finally get to it?
And so, in the same way,
impatience with time,
always wanting the
future, is frustrating.
Now, in Indian thought, one
of the basic myths or ideas
is of Brahma, the world
creator who has infinite power
and has everything
that he wants.
But he is like our dreamer.
And he wants to do something
with the infinite time
at his disposal.
And therefore, what he does
is to dream just like this,
to dream the existence
of the world.
And he does it over enormous and
incalculable periods of time,
dreaming that he is
the knower, the self,
in every single creature
that exist in the world,
dreaming them all at once,
experiencing their joys
and sorrows, completely
plunging himself
into the adventure of
forgetting who he is.
But he does this for
immense and vast periods,
rivaling in
conception the latest
modern astronomical ideas
of the extent of time.
You know, the basic
reckoning period
of time in the life of Brahma
the Creator is called a kalpa.
And that is a period
of 4,320,000 years.
And the kalpas are called
the days of Brahma.
One day from Brahma's
life is a kalpa.
And so, there are
the periods-- which
you can call his days
or nights, whichever
you wish-- where
he goes into dream.
And he dreams the world.
And then, for the
following kalpa,
he wakes up and realizes
who he is again.
And then, he dreams again, going
on and on and on through years
of kalpas, of 360 days and
nights of Brahma, centuries
of kalpas, endlessly,
endlessly, endlessly.
For the Hindu doesn't think
of time in quite the same way
that we do.
Obviously, we think
of time as linear, day
after day after day after
day, going along in a line.
Or sometimes, we like to think
of time as this sort of line,
going up, and up, and up,
and up, and up, and up,
and getting better
and better and better.
But that's not the
fundamental idea of time.
For almost any
people in the world,
outside of Western
civilization-- in nearly
every other part of the world,
time is thought of as a circle.
And they say, after
all, isn't it reasonable
for it to be a circle?
Look at your watch.
Doesn't your watch
go round and round?
But the Hindus not only think
of time as cycling-- going round
and round and round forever,
just as the Earth cycles round
and around the sun-- they also
think of it in another, quite
fundamentally different way
from our conception of time.
I referred to this idea
that's common among us,
that time is going
up and up, and things
are getting better and better.
But in the general Hindu
view, in every cycle of time,
things tend, on the whole,
to get worse and worse.
They divide the
kalpa into a number
of shorter periods, each
of which is called a yuga.
But the yugas are so
arranged that there
are four of them
in what is called
a mahayuga, or "great yuga."
The first one, occupying
this period, is the longest.
The second one occupies a
shorter period from here
to here.
The third, still
shorter than the second.
And the fourth, the
shortest of all.
And the names that
are given to them
are the names of the throws
in the Indian game of dice.
The best throw, the throw
of four is called krita.
And that lasts for
the longest time.
It is a golden age where
everything is just fine.
The next one is called
treta, the throw of three,
pretty good, but
not quite so good.
The third is called
dvapara, the throw of two.
And here, good and evil are
equally balanced, not so hot.
The final throw, the throw
of one, is called kali,
the worst throw.
And that's the shortest period.
And of course, according
to Hindu ideas,
we're living in it now.
But in kali yuga,
everything goes to pieces
and becomes dreadful.
And time goes faster.
Now, why do they feel that
time deteriorates in this way?
It is because, as
one lives in time
and becomes more and
more conscious of time,
we tend, more and more,
to pursue the future,
as I said a little while ago.
And as we pursue the
future, present time
becomes more and
more unsatisfactory.
And we feel that we have
to chase our happiness
at greater and greater speeds.
I was talking the other day to
a college president who said,
you know, I'm so
busy now that I'm
going to have to
get a helicopter.
I said, whatever
you do, don't do it.
Because if you get it, more
will be expected of you.
You'll be expected to go
to more places faster.
And you see, in this
whole problem of speed,
of getting advantages
in life because we
can move about rapidly, we
forget that speed is only
of real advantage
for you if you're
the only person who has it.
Then, you can get
ahead of other people.
But the minute everybody
else catches up with you,
you're all back where you were,
only going much faster and much
more nervously, going, as
it were, faster and faster
to less and less
desirable objectives.
We hurry everything we do.
We make our products, our
houses, our furniture,
our clothes so that they
become obsolete quickly.
We're in such a hurry
to get everything done,
we pay attention to the
front rather than the back.
Who, for example,
in this day and age,
has time to do
anything like this?
Here's a piece of
Chinese embroidery.
Those among you who've ever
done any embroidery, some
of the ladies, will
no doubt recognize
that this is a kind of
stitch called needle-point.
It's done on a material made
up of minute little squares
of thread, like a grid
or lattice of thread.
And this work here is
so minute that there
are 1,024 stitches
to the square inch.
So well done, further more,
that if you turn it over
and look at the back, the back
is almost as neat as the front.
You know, ordinarily, when you
embroider, you take shortcuts
around the back
and take threads,
jumping spaces and tying
knots and things of that kind.
But here, no hurry.
Or take such an ordinary
object as a lady's pocketbook.
This, again, is Chinese
embroidery work in shaded silk,
very patiently done
over a padded base
underneath so that
the figures stand out.
And inside it, a little sewing
case, which opens up, showing,
concealed within, the
place for the scissors,
about the most delicate work.
But in this day and age,
we don't have time for it.
Because we are always in a
hurry to get things finished.
And so the things that we
finish weren't worth finishing,
because they were done so fast.
After all, the
enjoyment of our world
is not really unlike
listening to music.
We don't play music in
order to get somewhere.
I mean, if the
objective of music
were to arrive at the
point-- say the last bar,
the final great crashing
chords of the symphony-- well,
then we'd be, just hurry up.
It's playing.
Play it as fast
as possible so as
to get to the culmination,
the end, as soon as possible.
Or just cut out
the whole symphony
and play only the last bars.
To be able to enjoy
it, we have got
to live each moment
of the playing,
and listen to it as if
it were the only thing
important to listen to.
And then, if we
do that, our time
has an entirely
different quality.
It's represented in
a Buddhist saying
that spring does not
become the summer.
There is spring.
And then, there is summer.
Firewood does not
turn into ashes.
There is, first, firewood.
And then, there are ashes.
The two stages being, as it
were, sufficient by themselves.
And this is intended to
give the idea of living
in a fully concrete present
into which you settle in.
I mean, the present,
for most of us,
isn't it just a
hairline on a dial?
And the hand goes by it, flash!
And there's nothing in
it, one after another.
But here, there is an
entirely different sense
of the present as something
you can settle into.
There's a line behind
me from a Chinese poem.
And it says,
literally, day, ditto.
In other words, day,
day, that is good day.
Every day is a good day.
And it comes as the
last line of this poem.
In spring, hundreds of flowers.
In summer, refreshing breeze.
In autumn, the moon.
Free your mind
from idle thoughts.
And for you, every
season is a good season.
Or every day is a good day.
And idle thoughts mean
illusory thoughts, thoughts
of pursuing a future, thoughts
of making one's happiness
depend on something
which isn't here at all.
But when one can come to
realize that the present is
the only place in
which you live,
and that the past and
the future are now
no more than useful illusions--
still useful, but useful only
if one can live in the
present-- then, as I say,
one can settle into
full participation
with the momentary
reality of life,
as it goes along--
just like music.
And so, in the arts
of the Far East,
there is reflected a kind
of delight in momentariness.
One can really
consider, for example,
this stem of a broken bamboo.
Or not only in painting
but in poetry--
a poem in the
Japanese haiku style.
Poems which just
crystallize a single moment.
In the dark forest,
a berry drops.
The sound of the water.
Or a painting of a man
sitting all alone in his boat
and listening to the water.
He is not asleep.
He is not dreaming.
He's a man living in
an entirely real world,
a world which we neglect.
Because we have no time to
sit and listen to the water.
After all, are not the
memories which you go over,
memories which persuade you that
it's really worth being alive,
really memories of certain
moments in which life
itself brought you
completely awake?
I know we all think of things
like the smell of coffee
and bacon cooking on
an autumn morning.
The smell of burning leaves.
I remember, particularly
for me, one glimpse
of a flock of sunlit pigeons
against the dark background
of the thundercloud.
And it's instances
like that that
are very largely celebrated
in Far Eastern art and poetry,
perceptions of the full reality
and intensity of the moment.
Such a one is this.
The sea darkens.
The voices of the wild
ducks are faintly white.
A brushwood gate and,
for a lock, this snail.
Or paintings where one sees
just a few birds on a branch,
so vividly alive
that you somehow
think the next time
you look at the branch,
the birds won't be there.
This is all an art form,
possible for people
who feel themselves to be living
in this real momentary world.
I remember, once, a very
wise man who used to give
lectures on philosophical
matters of this kind--
before he started
giving any lecture,
would sit for a while, looking
at his audience very intently,
like this.
And then, quite suddenly,
he would say, wake up!
You're all fast asleep!
And if you don't wake up,
I won't give any lecture.
And another Chinese sage
pointed one day at some flowers
while talking to
a friend and said,
most people look at these
as if they were in a dream.
And Buddha, one of the
wisest of the sons of Ayesha.
His real name was Gautama.
But he was called
Buddha because Buddha
means "the awakened one,"
"the man who woke up."
Now, in what sense was he awake?
He was awake in the sense that
he was completely all here.
After all, we say about a person
who is nuts, he's not all here.
He's not all there.
But our whole culture, our whole
civilization-- insofar as it
is involved with time and living
only for a future-- is nuts.
It's not all here.
We are not awake.
We are not complete alive now.
And consequently, we are
so hungry and so greedy.
Because everything
seems tasteless.
We are living for an abstraction
which has not had come to be.
And we don't know
what really is.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>This is National
Educational Television.